Documentation (#3)
AbsaOSS/k3d-action: README.md

# AbsaOSS/k3d-action

> Easy to use GitHub action allows you to test single/multi-cluster apps with additional private registry support.

Reviewer: imho this action has many possible applications, and we should not limit it to testing scope only.
```suggestion
A GitHub Action to run lightweight ephemeral Kubernetes clusters during workflow
```

 have a multiple clusters in different subnets. 
 
 - `subnet-CIDR` (Optional) Cluster subnet CIDR. Provide new CIDR only if `network` is defined first time.
 
 - `use-default-registry` (Optional) If `true`, injects private image registry `registry.localhost:5000` into action.
 
 - `override-registry-config-path` (Optional) Defines a path to custom registry configuration, in case the default 
 registry is not sufficient. Requires `use-default-registry` to be set to `true`. 

### Outputs
 
  - `network` Detected k3s cluster network
  - `subnet-CIDR` Detected k3s subnet CIDR

Output attributes are accessible via `id`, e.g.:
```yaml
 ${{ steps.<id>.outputs.network }} ${{ steps.<id>.outputs.subnet-CIDR }}
```

For more details see: [Multi Cluster on isolated networks](#multi-cluster-on-isolated-networks)

## Single Cluster
Although AbsaOSS/k3d-action strongly supports multi-cluster. Single cluster scenarios are very popular. The minimum single-cluster 
configuration looks like this :
```yaml
      - uses: AbsaOSS/k3d-action@v1.0.0
        name: "Create Single Cluster"
        with:
          cluster-name: "test-cluster-1"
          args: --agents 1
```

> k3d creates a cluster with one worker node (having traefik and metrics services), one agent and one default load-balancer node. In real scenarios you might prefer to do some port mapping and disable default load balancer. Such an action would look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
k3d creates a cluster with one worker node (with [traefik](https://traefik.io/) and metrics services), one agent and one default load-balancer node. In real scenarios you might prefer to do some port mapping and disable default load balancer. Such an action would look like this:
```

# AbsaOSS/k3d-action
Easy to use GitHub action allows you to test single/multi-cluster apps with additional private registry support.

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Getting started](#getting-started)
- [Single Cluster](#single-cluster)
- [Multi Cluster](#multi-cluster)
    - [Multi Clusters on default network](#multi-cluster-on-default-network)
    - [Multi Cluster on isolated networks](#multi-cluster-on-isolated-networks)
    - [Two pairs of clusters on two isolated networks](#two-pairs-of-clusters-on-two-isolated-networks)
- [Private Registry](#private-registry)
    - [Single Cluster](#single-cluster-with-private-registry)
    - [Multi Cluster](#multi-cluster-with-private-registry)
    - [Custom Private Registry](#using-custom-private-registry)

## Introduction

> Applications running on kubernetes clusters (microservices, controllers,...) come with their own set of complexities and concerns. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Applications running on Kubernetes clusters (microservices, controllers,...) come with their own set of complexities and concerns. 
```

In particular, E2E testing k8s based applications requires new approaches to confirm proper operation and continued 
availability under heavy load or in the face of resource failure. **AbsaOSS/k3d-action allows to test the** _overall_ **application 
functionality**. For instance, the E2E use-case is [operator](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/) testing
 in [AbsaOSS/k8gb](https://github.com/AbsaOSS/k8gb). 

## Getting started
AbsaOSS/k3d-action runs [k3d](https://k3d.io/) which is a lightweight wrapper to run [k3s](https://k3s.io/) 

> (Rancher Lab’s minimal Kubernetes distribution) in a docker. Thanks to that, we could spin up the test environment 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(Rancher Lab’s minimal Kubernetes distribution) in containers. Thanks to that, we could spin up the test environment 
```

quickly with minimal memory requirements, which is especially important in multi-cluster environments.

AbsaOSS/k3d-action defines several input attributes and two outputs:

### Inputs
 - `cluster-name` (Required) Cluster name.
 
 - `args` (Optional) list of k3d arguments defined by [k3d command tree](https://k3d.io/usage/commands/)
 
 - `network` (Optional) Cluster network name. AbsaOSS/k3d-action primarily creates clusters in the default bridge-network 
 called  `k3d-action-bridge-network` with subnet CIDR `172.16.0.0/24`. You can leave this field empty until you  need to 
 have a multiple clusters in different subnets. 
 
 - `subnet-CIDR` (Optional) Cluster subnet CIDR. Provide new CIDR only if `network` is defined first time.
 

>  - `use-default-registry` (Optional) If `true`, injects private docker registry `registry.localhost:5000` into action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - `use-default-registry` (Optional) If `true`, injects private image registry `registry.localhost:5000` into action.
```

 
 - `override-registry-config-path` (Optional) Defines a path to custom registry configuration, in case the default 
 registry is not sufficient. Requires `use-default-registry` to be set to `true`. 

### Outputs
 
  - `network` Detected k3s cluster network
  - `subnet-CIDR` Detected k3s subnet CIDR

Output attributes are accessible via `id`, e.g.:
```yaml
 ${{ steps.<id>.outputs.network }} ${{ steps.<id>.outputs.subnet-CIDR }}
```

For more details see: [Multi Cluster on isolated networks](#multi-cluster-on-isolated-networks)

## Single Cluster
Although AbsaOSS/k3d-action strongly supports multi-cluster. Single cluster scenarios are very popular. The minimum single-cluster 
configuration looks like this :
```yaml
      - uses: AbsaOSS/k3d-action@v1.0.0
        name: "Create Single Cluster"
        with:
          cluster-name: "test-cluster-1"
          args: --agents 1
```

> k3d creates a cluster with one server node (having traefik and metrics services), one agent and one default load-balancer node. In the real scenarios you 
> prefer to do some port-mapping and disable default load-balancer. Such action looks like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
k3d creates a cluster with one worker node (having traefik and metrics services), one agent and one default load-balancer node. In real scenarios you might prefer to do some port mapping and disable default load balancer. Such an action would look like this:
```

```yaml
      - uses: AbsaOSS/k3d-action@v1.0.0
        name: "Create Single Cluster"
        with:
          cluster-name: "test-cluster-1"
          args: >-
            -p "8083:80@agent[0]"
            -p "8443:443@agent[0]"
            -p "5053:53/udp@agent[0]"
            --agents 3
            --no-lb
            --k3s-server-arg "--no-deploy=traefik,servicelb,metrics-server"
```

> The created cluster exposes two TCP (:8083,:8443) and one UDP (:5053) ports. The cluster comprises one server, three 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The created cluster exposes two TCP (`:8083`,`:8443`) and one UDP (`:5053`) ports. The cluster comprises one server, three 
```

        name: "Create 1st Cluster in 172.20.1.0/24"
        with:
          cluster-name: "test-cluster-1-b"
          network: "nw02"
          subnet-CIDR: "172.20.1.0/24"
          args: >-
            --agents 1
            --no-lb
            --k3s-server-arg "--no-deploy=traefik,servicelb,metrics-server"

      - uses: AbsaOSS/k3d-action@v1.0.0
        name: "Create 2nd Cluster in 172.20.1.0/24"
        with:
          cluster-name: "test-cluster-2-b"
          network: "nw02"
          args: >-
            --agents 1
            --no-lb
            --k3s-server-arg "--no-deploy=traefik,servicelb,metrics-server"
```
As you can see, `test-cluster-2-a` doesn't specify subnet-CIDR, because it inherits CIDR from 
`test-cluster-1-a`, but network `nw01` is shared. The same for `test-cluster-2-b` and `test-cluster-1-b`.

For more details see: [Demo](https://github.com/AbsaOSS/k3d-action/actions?query=workflow%3A%22Multi+cluster%3B+two+pairs+of+clusters+on+two+isolated+networks%22), 
[Source](./.github/workflows/multi-cluster-two-piars.yaml)
## Private Registry

Before test starts, you need to build your app and install into the cluster. This requires interaction 

> with the docker registry. Usually you don't want to push a new image into the remote registry for each test. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the image registry. Usually you don't want to push a new image into the remote registry for each test. 
```

> AbsaOSS/k3d-action provides private docker registry called `registry.localhost`. Registry is by default listening 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AbsaOSS/k3d-action provides private image registry called `registry.localhost`. Registry is by default listening 
```

functionality**. For instance, the E2E use-case is [operator](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/) testing
 in [AbsaOSS/k8gb](https://github.com/AbsaOSS/k8gb). 

## Getting started
AbsaOSS/k3d-action runs [k3d](https://k3d.io/) which is a lightweight wrapper to run [k3s](https://k3s.io/) 
(Rancher Lab’s minimal Kubernetes distribution) in a docker. Thanks to that, we could spin up the test environment 
quickly with minimal memory requirements, which is especially important in multi-cluster environments.

AbsaOSS/k3d-action defines several input attributes and two outputs:

### Inputs
 - `cluster-name` (Required) Cluster name.
 
 - `args` (Optional) list of k3d arguments defined by [k3d command tree](https://k3d.io/usage/commands/)
 
 - `network` (Optional) Cluster network name. AbsaOSS/k3d-action primarily creates clusters in the default bridge-network 
 called  `k3d-action-bridge-network` with subnet CIDR `172.16.0.0/24`. You can leave this field empty until you  need to 
 have a multiple clusters in different subnets. 
 
 - `subnet-CIDR` (Optional) Cluster subnet CIDR. Provide new CIDR only if `network` is defined first time.
 

>  - `use-default-registry` (Optional) If `true`, [injects](https://github.com/AbsaOSS/k3d-action/runs/1537165520?check_suite_focus=true#step:3:34) 

Reviewer 3: We probably shouldn't include build log links into the documentation.
Logs will expire after 90 days, see
https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/actions/reference/usage-limits-billing-and-administration#artifact-and-log-retention-policy

Author: thx, will fix and amend changed

## Private Registry

Before test starts, you need to build your app and install into the cluster. This requires interaction 
with the docker registry. Usually you don't want to push a new image into the remote registry for each test. 
AbsaOSS/k3d-action provides private docker registry called `registry.localhost`. Registry is by default listening 
on port `5000` with no authentication and TLS. For more details, 
see https://rancher.com/docs/k3s/latest/en/installation/private-registry/.
Example below demonstrates how to interact with default docker registry: 
```Makefile
	docker build . -t registry.localhost:5000/test:v0.0.1
	docker push registry.localhost:5000/test:v0.0.1
```

### Single Cluster With Private Registry
```yaml
      - uses: AbsaOSS/k3d-action@v1.0.0
        id: single-cluster
        name: "Create single Cluster with Registry"
        with:
          cluster-name: "test-cluster-1"
          use-default-registry: true
          args: >-
            --agents 1
            --no-lb
            --k3s-server-arg "--no-deploy=traefik,servicelb,metrics-server"
```
`use-default-registry: true` is only stuff you need to do. AbsaOSS/k3d-action 

> [injects](https://github.com/AbsaOSS/k3d-action/runs/1537165520?check_suite_focus=true#step:3:34) default registry 

Reviewer 3: Same as above
